my first guest tonight can speak with
authority about the presidency of Donald
Trump in his book the room where it
happened John Bolton offers a detailed
account of his 17 months as president
Trump's National Security advisor in
2018 and 19 before that he was US
ambassador to the United Nations under
George W book Bush John Bolton welcome
to the day now we appear to be heading
towards a presidential election rematch
between uh Trump and Joe Biden in the
forwards of the new paperback edition of
your book the room where it happened you
say Donald Trump is unfit to be
president
why well he's not competent to handle
the job he didn't know much about it
when he came into office in 2017 and he
didn't know very much more when he left
in 2021 certainly in the National
Security space he didn't have a guiding
philosophy he didn't do policy making as
we normally understand that term he
didn't appreciate the gravity of the
issues that confronted him uh and he
doesn't have any really better idea
today so at a time of increasing
International difficulties to say the
least uh he he is exactly the wrong
person to uh become president of the
United States so is that an argument for
another Biden
presidency no not at all I don't think
Biden is fit to be president either
although for somewhat different reasons
uh and it's very unfortunate that the
country uh is facing this choice you
know we have polls that now show uh up
to 80% or more of Americans do not want
to see a Biden Trump rematch and that as
of now is looks exactly like what we're
going to get so Trump unfit because of
incompetence Biden unfit
because well I don't think his policies
are are the right policies and I think
the Democrats are whistling past the
graveyard quite literally to nominate uh
to nominate him if he had stepped aside
I think the Democrats would have had a
very active primary race for their
nomination and that actually might have
helped us on the Republican side
dislodge Donald Trump of a second Trump
presidency you've written if his first
four years were bad the second for will
be worse Trump really cares only about
retribution for himself and it will
consume much of a second term so John
Bolton who are the likely targets of
Donald Trump's retribution and what's
payback likely to look
like well I think given that Trump's
view of the presidency is a series of
decisions about what benefits Donald
Trump politically primarily but maybe
economically as well he he will look at
the people who stood in his way his
political opponents and in uh his world
the constitutional constraints that we
have the protections for uh dissent uh
really uh are not things that concern
him so he's indicated for example he
thinks Mark millee the former chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff uh
committed treason uh for talking to his
Chinese counterpart uh in 2020 to say
that whatever you see on television it's
just a political there's no change in
the US uh uh military or diplomatic
retin status
uh Trump always used to say when I was
National Security advisor he wanted to
prosecute former Secretary of State John
KY for violating what we call the Logan
act which is an old statute about not
conducting a private foreign policy U
and he tried to repress my book that
that you just mentioned from being
published because he didn't like it
saying critical things about him and his
conduct in office so there are a wide
range of potential targets and I'm sure
Trump will be eager to get at it all
right well that's still something that
that may or may not happen let's look at
something that that's happening at the
moment the the the conflict in Gaza
between Israel and Hamas and the White
House has been pressing Israel not to
launch a ground offensive in Rafa uh
where something like a million civilians
are Sheltering with nowhere to go um
what is your take on whether or not
Israel should do
this well I think they're going to go
ahead I mean when the people talk about
a ground defensive you make it sound
like the Battle of the Bulge or
something when in fact most of the
combat in Gaza right now is being
conducted in this
incredible system of tunnels that Hamas
dug underneath what seems to be most of
the Gaza Strip how many tens of millions
of dollars they spent on that rather
than the economic betterment of the Gaz
and residents is an interesting question
but they're H up down there and they're
trying to last the Israelis out so I
think that the Israelis obviously have
an obligation to take due concern for
civilian life but they're also free to
to uh rid themselves of the threat of
Hamas terrorism right so so in any white
house uh in which you may or may not
serve yours would not be one of the
voices uh uh cautioning uh Israel uh to
U be uh to to take more care or to or to
not to go into
Gaza well I think they did what they
were entitled to do the right of
self-defense means you don't uh respond
merely by killing the number of people
that uh Hamas killed on October the 7th
you're entitled to eliminate the threat
in World War II the United States
eliminated Japanese and German threats
which we were entitled to do in our own
self-defense and as part of this
elimination of threat as you put it um
Israel has killed something like 30,000
civilians again the White House has
criticized Israel for going too far in
its response to the
October 7 Terror attacks at the White
House most countries in Europe and
indeed most of the global South um what
do you think has Israel gone too
far well I th those are Hamas figures
and it raises the question even if
30,000 is the right number H how many do
you consider Hamas terrorist and how
many do you consider civilians you know
most most terrorists don't go around in
un uniforms uh and and you can you can
Aid in a beted terrorist activity in in
a lot of different ways uh so I I think
it's uh it's there's a propaganda war
going on here I think Kamas is beating
Israel in the propaganda War but I'm not
sure that's a reflection of reality so
just so we're clear uh you don't believe
that Israel has gone too far in its
reaction no I mean if if you believe in
the right to self-defense you have to
believe that it's permissible to
eliminate a terrorist threat nobody
should have to live with a terrorist
threat on their border and that's what
the Israelis are
doing returning to um Donald Trump
because one of the the the big issues um
regardless of who is next in the White
House is is the future of NATO and a lot
of European leaders have been much
exercised by Mr Trump's recent statement
that he would encourage Russia to do
whatever the hell they want to any NATO
country that doesn't meet the the 2%
guidelines on defense spending um was
this Bluster do you think
no I think in a second term Trump will
withdraw the United States from NATO I
describ in my book uh the scene at the
2018 NATO Summit in Brussels where he
came within an inch of actually doing it
then uh so I think it's very likely he
will withdraw in a second term I think
that's a catastrophic mistake uh for the
United States and and the West as a
whole but uh he has been able to beat
the drum very effectively on the number
of European countries that haven't lived
up to the commitment they made
voluntarily in 2014 to spend 2% of GDP
on defense uh uh Trump is very
transactional he thinks in dollars and
cents terms he doesn't have a strategic
Vision uh and uh and many Europeans and
I'll be honest Canada have played right
into his hands he's he's not urging
people to spend more because he wants to
strengthen NATO he doesn't expect
ultimately that that most of these
members will make it to 2%
and that will be the basis on which he
withdraws the United States from the
alliance right so that so lacking a
defense strategy this is entirely this
and I appreciate we're speculating this
would be entirely transactional this
would not be as part of some uh bigger
strategy this would be just because you
haven't paid your money therefore we are
leaving well that and he doesn't like
the trade deals that exist between the
European Union and the United states he
never liked the fact that Europe was
buying natural gas from Russia over the
nordstream pipeline which I I think was
an entirely valid point Ronald Reagan
warned Europe warned Europe in the 1980s
do not become dependent on Russian oil
and natural gas good talking to you
you've given us much to think about
former US National Security advisor uh
Ambassador John Bolton thank
you thank
you